Early on, in this lesson,
we learned that a relational database requires a predefined structure for its tables.
In a real-world application,
there will be continuous updates to the applications feature set.
These updates might require updates to the schema.
In a large organization where the database server is shared by multiple applications,
schema updates are controlled through a release process.
This process is called a Database migration.
With the rise of micro-services,
applications have become more nimble,
and application development processes more agile.
Applications are updated and deployed continuously.
A strict schema update process severely limits an application's release cadence.
Wouldn't it be nice to run database migrations when an application is updated?
Meet Flyway, a library that runs database migrations on the application's behalf.
Flyway uses a simple algorithm to manage migrations.
Each migration that needs to be applied is incrementally versioned.
Flyway keeps track of versions applied by storing
them in the database and applies new ones if there are any.
Please read the next section to understand how to set up and run migrations using Flyway.
Let's see how we can use driver manager to connect to the database.
This is a simple class with a main method.
The get-connection method establishes
a database connection and it requires a database URL.
The database URL contains
all the relevant information necessary to establish a connection.
First, it specifies what type of database that we're connecting to, MySQL.
Where the database servers is located, localhost.
If the server is running on a port other than the default port,
you would specify the port number here.
The database we are connecting to, course 3.
It also specifies the username and the password.
Using the database type,
the driver manager selects
the appropriate driver from the class path and obtains a connection.
An important thing to note,
connection is wrapped in a try with resources block.
So it's closed once the block exits.
Connections must be closed after use.
Let's run this class to connect to MySQL.
Connected to MySQL, nice.
We now have a connection to the MySQL database.
Using the connection object,
let's create a statement to send SQL queries to the database.
The create statement creates a statement object.
The execute query sends the SQL query to the database,
and returns the results.
Note that the statement object is also wrapped in a try-with-resources block,
since it must be closed after use.
Let's run this class to see if the query is executed.
It does, but we're not using the results of the query.
Let's do that in the next video.
Now we have a connection to the database,
we executed a SQL query,
and it's time to process the results.
The results are held in a result set object.
A result set object maintains a cursor pointing to its current row of data.
Initially, the cursor is positioned just before the first row.
The next method, moves the cursor to the next row and
because it returns false when there are no more rows in the results set object,
it can be used inside a While-loop to iterate through the results set.
Needless to say, the result set object should also be wrapped in a try block.
Inside the While-loop we can use
the corresponding get method for the column type to read its value.
We know that orderId is an integer,
so we use getInt.
CustomerName is a wildcard which translates to a string in Java,
so we use getString.
You can also read column values by their index in the query.
Let's see if it prints the ID and the name.
Viola! It did.
We connected to MySQL,
executed the SQL query,
and process the results.
We have now completed the three basic steps of database interactions.